[Doc] PLDM stack spec (#95)
chipsalliance/caliptra-mcu-sw: docs/src/pldm.md

# PLDM stack

## Overview

The Platform Level Data Model (PLDM) is a suite of specifications that define a common data model and message formats for communication between management controllers and managed devices. It is designed to standardize the way devices communicate in a platform management environment, enabling interoperability and simplifying the management of hardware components. In the context of Caliptra MCU, [PLDM Base Protocol](https://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/documents/DSP0240_1.1.0.pdf) and [PLDM for Firmware Update Protocol](https://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/files/standards/documents/DSP0267_1.3.0.pdf) are supported by PLDM stack to facilitate the following use cases:

- **PLDM message control and discovery**: This feature enables the device to be discovered by the platform management controller (typically a BMC) following MCTP enumeration. It forms the foundation for running other PLDM protocols.

> - **Streaming boot reminder firmware**: PLDM firmware update protocol defines standardized messages and data structures for obtaining firmware code and data. MCU leverages it to stream boot reminder firmware, which is vendor-specific SoC firmware and beyond. There are several customized amendments to PLDM firmware update specification to enable streaming boot and automatic activation. Details are available in OCP whitepaper [Flashless Boot using OCP, PCIe, and DMTF Standards](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cjdgcKgOzcug5bBoK6k2Mw2mvsQJElp8bs0ec_xLZHc/edit?usp=sharing).

Reviewer: minor grammar and spelling fixes:
```suggestion
- **Streaming boot remainder firmware**: PLDM firmware update protocol defines standardized messages and data structures for obtaining firmware code and data. MCU leverages it to stream boot the remainder firmware, which is any vendor-specific SoC or other firmware. There are several customized amendments to the PLDM firmware update specification to enable streaming boot and automatic activation. Details are available in the OCP whitepaper, [Flashless Boot using OCP, PCIe, and DMTF Standards](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cjdgcKgOzcug5bBoK6k2Mw2mvsQJElp8bs0ec_xLZHc/edit?usp=sharing).
```

- **Impactless firmware update**: PLDM firmware update over MCTP is a well-established approach for firmware updates, supporting multiple firmware components within a single package. Updates can be applied to a subset of components supported by the Firmware Device (FD), which is a valuable properity to enable impactless updates. Details can be found in [MCU firmware update spec](TODO: link to the document)

## Architecture

PLDM stack in MCU runtime is a modular implementation that supports PLDM base protocol as responder and PLDM firmware update protocol as Firmware Device(FD). It operates in the userspace of MCU runtime, interacts with the MCTP transport layer to handle communication.

### PLDM stack for base protocol

![PLDM stack base](images/pldm_stack_base.svg)

- **PLDM service**
      - Listens for incoming PLDM requests.
      - Extracts the command op code from the request and invokes the corresponding handler to process.
      - Sends the response via MCTP transport layer.
- **Command handler**
      - Interacts with message decoding library to decode the request.

>       - Executs the command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - Executes the command.
```

    UA->>FD: GetFirmwareParameters
    FD-->>UA: FirmwareParameters Response
    UA->>FD: RequestUpdate
    FD-->>UA: Update Response
    UA->>FD: PassComponentTable
    FD-->>UA: ComponentTable Response
    UA->>FD: UpdateComponent
    FD-->>UA: UpdateComponent Response
    FD->>UA: RequestFirmwareData
    UA-->>FD: FirmwareData Response
    FD->>UA: TransferComplete
    UA-->>FD: TransferComplete Response
    Note over FD: Verifying component
    FD->>UA: VerifyComplete
    UA-->>FD: VerifyComplete Response
    FD->>UA: ApplyComplete
    UA-->>FD: ApplyComplete Response
    UA->>FD: ActivateFirmware
    FD-->>UA: ActivateFirmware Response
    UA->>FD: GetStatus
    FD-->>UA: Status Response
```

## Interface

```Rust
/// Trait representing a PLDM Firmware Update Service Manager.
///
/// This trait defines the necessary methods to start and stop the PLDM firmware update service.
///
/// # Methods
///
/// * `start_service` - Asynchronously starts the PLDM firmware update service.
/// * `stop_service` - Asynchronously stops the PLDM firmware update service.
///
/// # Errors
///
/// Both methods return a `Result` which, on error, contains a `PldmServiceError`.

> pub trait PldmFwUpdateServiceMgr {

Reviewer: It would be good here and earlier to specify which components are in the user application, user-mode APIs, kernel capsules, and kernel drivers.

That would help understand which traits are called from which contexts as well.

///   Executes a command with the given payload and context.
///   - `payload`: A mutable reference to the payload data to be processed.
///   - `context`: A mutable reference to the PLDM context.
///   - Returns the size of the processed data.
///
/// - `send_notification()`:
///   Sends a notification to other modules or APIs asynchronously.
///
/// - `receive_notification()`:
///   Receives a notification from other modules or APIs asynchronously.
pub trait CommandHandler: Send + Sync {
    async fn execute(&self, payload: &mut [u8], context: &mut PldmContext) -> usize;
    async fn send_notification(&self);
    async fn receive_notification(&self);
}

/// Represents a PLDM Command Interface Responder.
///
/// This struct is responsible for handling the PLDM command interface
/// by maintaining a collection of command handlers and the PLDM context.
///
/// # Fields
///
/// * `handlers` - A hashmap that maps command codes to their respective command handlers.
/// * `context` - The PLDM context used for processing commands.
/// * `other fields` - Additional fields required for the command interface responder.
pub struct CmdInterfaceResponder {

>     handlers: HashMap<u8, Box<dyn CommandHandler>>,

Reviewer: I think we're not going to have `HashMap` and `Box` available, since they require allocations. Instead, we should probably use the `LinkList` structures that some of the virtualizers and muxes use: https://github.com/tock/tock/blob/master/capsules/core/src/virtualizers/virtual_alarm.rs#L46

    /// # Arguments
    ///
    /// * `payload` - A mutable reference to a byte slice that will be used to generate the request.
    ///
    /// # Returns
    ///
    /// A `Result` containing the size of the generated request on success, or a `MessageHandlerError` on failure.
    async fn generate_request(&self, payload: &mut [u8]) -> Result<usize, MessageHandlerError>;
}
pub struct MessageHandlerError(pub NonZeroU32);

/// Trait representing a command handler that can execute commands asynchronously.
///
/// # Required Methods
///
/// - `execute(&self, payload: &mut [u8], context: &mut PldmContext) -> usize`:
///   Executes a command with the given payload and context.
///   - `payload`: A mutable reference to the payload data to be processed.
///   - `context`: A mutable reference to the PLDM context.
///   - Returns the size of the processed data.
///
/// - `send_notification()`:
///   Sends a notification to other modules or APIs asynchronously.
///
/// - `receive_notification()`:
///   Receives a notification from other modules or APIs asynchronously.
pub trait CommandHandler: Send + Sync {
    async fn execute(&self, payload: &mut [u8], context: &mut PldmContext) -> usize;

>     async fn send_notification(&self);

Reviewer 2: Can the notification registration be on PldmFwUpdateService since the API will be interfacing with the PldmFwUpdateService and needs to register some notification callbacks?
Also, we may not need to notify all PLDM commands to the application, only a handful needs to be notified. Let me know what you think or could you provide an example how API can register callbacks with the current approach.

I was thinking something like this:

```
// Define a trait Notifications that the API will implement. The trait methods will be called when PldmFwUpdateService needs to notify the specific event
trait Notifications {
	fn on_request_update_received(payload: &[u8]) -> Result<(),ErrCode>;
	fn on_image_verifypayload: &[u8]() -> Result<(),ErrCode>;
	fn on_image_apply(payload: &[u8]) -> Result<(),ErrCode>;
	fn on_update_component_received(payload: &[u8]) -> Result<(),ErrCode>;
	fn on_activate_firmware_received(payload: &[u8]() -> Result<(),ErrCode>;
}

// Add the Notifications to the service when instantiating it
pub struct PldmFwUpdateService<T: Mctp, U: MessageResponder, R: MessageRequester, N: Notifications> {
    transport: T,
    cmd_interface_responder: MessageResponder,
    cmd_interface_requester: MessageRequester,
    notifications: N
    /// other fields
}

// in RequestUpdate Command Handler, call the appropriate notifications function.
// For example
pub struct RequestUpdateCmdHandler {}
impl CommandHandler for RequestUpdateCmdHandler {
	async fn execute(&self, payload: &mut [u8], context: &mut PldmContext) -> usize {
		let result = self.notifications.on_request_update_received(payload);
		// check result
		// do other stuff

	}
}

```

Author: @mlvisaya,  thanks a lot for your thoughtful suggestion on the notification mechanism. I think this approach makes perfect sense. I will update the interface to reflect this.
